[AS PASSED BY THE MAJLIS-E-SHOORA (PARLIAMENT)] 
An 
Act 
further to amend the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 
 WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend the Muslim Family Laws 
Ordinance, 1961 (VIII of 1961) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; 
 It is hereby enacted as follows:- 
1. Short title and commencement.― (1) This Act shall be called the 
Muslim Family Laws (Amendment) Act, 2021. 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 
2. Amendment of section 4, Ordinance VIII of 1961 .- In the 
Muslim Family Laws Ordinance , 1961 (VIII of 1961), section 4 shall be 
renumbered as sub -section (1) thereof and after sub -section (1), renumbered 
as aforesaid, the following new sub-sections shall be added, namely:- 
“(2) If a Muslim male from Ahl-e-Teshih dies, the share of a widow i n 
the immovable property left behind by her deceased husband shall be as 
follows:― 
(a) one-fourth share of the fixed price or value of the property, if 
there is no child left behind the deceased husband; and 
(b) one-eighth share, if there is child left behind. 
 
(3) If there are two or more widows, the share, as mentioned in sub -
section (2), shall be divided equally among them. 
 
(4) The price or value of the property shall be the price or value 
existing at the time of payment and not the price or value which existed at 
the time of death of the husband: 
Provided that if the legal heirs of the deceased do not give the widow her 
share in the above terms, she shall become entitled to her due share in the 
corpus of immovable property. 
(5) A widow is entitled to her share in the corpu s of movable property 
of her deceased husband provided that the provisions of sub -sections (2) and 
(3) shall mutatis mutandis apply. 
 
(6) Fiqah-e-Jafri recognizes right of a husband to get his share  from 
the property left by his deceased wife, either movable o r immovable, as 
follows:- 
 
(a) one-half share, if there is no child left behind; and 
 
(b) one-fourth share of the property, if there is child left behind. 
 
(7) In case of dispute, the parties or any of the parties may have 
recourse to a court of competent jurisdiction  or by approaching the Mujtahid-
e-Alam from the panel maintained by the Council of Islamic Ideology. The 
decision of Mujtahid-e-Alam shall have a status of an award and the same 
shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 
1940 (X of 1940). 
 
Explanation.- The expression “Mujtahid-e-Alam (Faqih-e-Azam)” means 
a juris -consult, religious scholar or doctor of Shia school of thought well 
versed with Shariah having international repute and of such recognition. The 
Council of Islamic Ideology shall maintain  a panel of Mujtahid-e-Alam having 
aforesaid qualifications. 
 
(8) As enshrined in Article 227 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, the inher itance rights of Ahle-e-Tashih and matters 
connected therewith or ancillary thereto shall be decided according to their 
personal law interpreted by Fiqah-e-Jafria (Shia school of thought).”.  
________ 
  
 
 
