Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 
MUSLIM FAMILY LAWS ORDINANCE, 1961 
(VIII OF 1961) 
An Ordinance to give effect to certain recommendations of the commission on marriage and 
Family Laws. Whereas it is expedient to give effect to certain recommendation of the 
commission on Marriage and Family Laws. Now, therefore in pursuance of the proclamation of 
the seventh day of October 1958, and in exercise of all powers enabling him in this behalf, the 
President is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance:- 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement 
(1) This Ordinance may be called the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961. 
(2) It extends to whole of Pakistan, and applies to all Muslim citizens of Pakistan, wherever they 
may be. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Federal Government may, by notification in the 
official Gazette, appoint in this behalf. 
2. Definition 
(a) “Arbitration Council” means a body consisting of the Chairman and a representative of each 
of the parties to a matter dealt with this Ordinance: 
Provided that where any party fails to nominate a representative within the prescribed time, the 
body formed without such representative shall be the Arbitration Council. 
(b) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Union Council or a person appointed by the Federal 
Government in the Cantonment areas or by the Provincial Government in other areas or by an 
Officer authorised in that behalf by any such Government to discharge the functions of 
chairman under Ordinance: 
Provided that where the Chairman of the Union Council is a non-Muslim, or he himself wishes to 
make an application to the Arbitration Council, or is, owing to illness or any other reason, 
unable to discharge the functions of Chairman, the Council shall elect one of its Muslim 
members as Chairman for the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(c) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under Sch. II. 
(d) “Union Council” means the Union Council or the Town or Union Committee constituted 
under the Basic Democracies Order, 1959 and having jurisdiction in the matter as prescribed. 
(e) “Ward” means a ward within a Union or Town as defined in the aforesaid Order. 
3. Ordinance to override other laws, etc. 
(1) The provisions of this Ordinance shall have effect notwithstanding any law, custom or 
usage, and the registration of Muslim marriages shall take place only in accordance with these 
provisions. 
(2) For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 
1940 (X of 1940), the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (Act V of 1908), and any other law 
regulating the procedure of Courts shall not apply to any Arbitration Council. 
4. Succession.In the event of death of any son or daughter of the propositus before the 
opening of succession, the children of such son or daughter, if any, living at the time the 
succession opens, shall per stripes, receive a share equivalent to the share which such son or 
daughter, as the case may be, would have received if alive. 
5. Registration of marriage. 
(1) Every marriage solemnized under Muslim Law shall be registered in accordance with the 
provisions of this Ordinance. 
(2) For the purpose of registration of marriage under this Ordinance, the Union Council shall 
grant licenses to one or more persons, to be called Nikah Registrars, but in no case shall more 
than on Nikah Registrar be licensed for any one Ward. 
(3) Every marriage not solemnized by the Nikah Registrar shall, for the purpose of registration 
under this Ordinance be reported to him by the person who has solemnized such marriage. 
(4). Whoever contravenes the provisions of such-section (3) shall be punishable with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extent to three months, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(5). The form of nikahnama, the registers to be maintained by Nikah Registrars, the records to 
be preserved by Union Councils, the manner in which marriage shall be registered and copies of 
nikhanama shall be supplied to parties, and the fees to be charged thereof, shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
(6) Any person may, on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, inspect at the office of the Union 
Council the record preserved under sub-section (5), or obtain a copy of any entry therein. 
6. Polygamy. 
(1) No man, during the subsistence of an existing marriage, shall except with the previous 
permission in writing of the Arbitration Council, contract another marriage, nor shall any such 
marriage contracted without such permission be registered under this Ordinance. 
(2) An application for permission under Sub-section (1) shall be submitted to the Chairman in 
the prescribed manner together with the prescribed fee, and shall state reasons for the 
proposed marriage, and whether the consent of existing wife or wives has been obtained 
thereto. 
(3) On receipt of the application under Sub-section (3), Chairman shall ask the applicant and his 
existing wife or wives each to nominate a representative, and the Arbitration Council so 
constituted may, if satisfied that the proposed marriage is necessary and just, grant, subject to 
such condition if any, as may be deemed fit, the permission applied for. 
(4) In deciding the application the Arbitration Council shall record its reasons for the decision 
and any party may, in the prescribed manner, within the prescribed period, and on payment of 
the prescribed fee, prefer an application for revision, to the Collector concerned and his decision 
shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. 
(5) Any man who contracts another marriage without the permission of the Arbitration Council 
shall, 
(a) pay immediately the entire amount of the dower whether prompt or deferred, due to the 
existing wife or wives, which amount, if not so paid, shall be recoverable as arrears of land 
revenue; and 
(b) on conviction upon complaint be punishable with the simple imprisonment which may 
extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. 
7. Talaq. 
(1) Any man who wishes to divorce his wife shall, as soon as may be after the pronouncement 
of talaq in any form whatsoever, give the chairman a notice in writing of his having done so, 
and shall supply a copy thereof to the wife. 
(2) Whoever, contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
(3) Save as provided in sub-section (5) talaq, unless revoked earlier, expressly or otherwise, 
shall not be effective until the expiration of ninety days from day on which notice under sub-
section (1) is delivered to the Chairman. 
(4) Within thirty days of the receipt of notice under Sub-section (1), the Chairman shall 
constitute an Arbitration Council for the purpose of bringing about a reconciliation between the 
parties, and the Arbitration Council shall take all steps necessary to bring about such 
reconciliation. 
(5) If the wife be pregnant at the time talaq is pronounced, talaq shall not be effective until the 
period mentioned in Sub-section (3) or the pregnancy, whichever later, ends. 
(6) Nothing shall debar a wife whose marriage has been terminated by talaq effective under his 
section from remarrying the same husband, without an intervening marriage with a third 
person, unless such termination is for the third time so effective. 
8. Dissolution of marriage otherwise than by talaq. Where the right to divorce has been duly 
delegated to the wife and she wishes to exercise that right, or where any of the parties to a 
marriage wishes to dissolves the marriage otherwise than by talaq the provisions of section 7 
shall, mutatis mutandis and so far as applicable, apply. 
9. Maintenance. 
(1) If any husband fails to maintain his wife adequately, or where there are more wives than 
one, fails to maintain them equitably, the wife, or all or any of the wives, may in addition to 
seeking any other legal remedy available apply to the Chairman who shall constitute an 
Arbitration Council to determine the matter, and the Arbitration Council may issue a certificate 
specifying the amount which shall be paid as maintenance by the husband. 
(2) A husband or wife may, in the prescribed manner, within the prescribed period, and on 
payment of the prescribed fee, prefer an application for revision of the certificate, to the 
Collector concerned and his decision shall be final and shall not be called in question in any 
Court. 
(3) Any amount payable under Sub-section (1) or, (2) if, not paid in the due time, shall be 
recoverable as arrears of land revenue. 
PUNJAB AMENDMENT In sub-section (2), the full-stop occurring at the end shall be replaced by 
a colon and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely: 
Provided that the Commissioner of a Division may, on an application made in this behalf and for 
reasons to be recorded, transfer an application for revision of the certificate from a Collector to 
any other Collector, or to a Director, Local Government, or to an Additional Commissioner in his 
Division. [Ord. II of 1975, Section 2]. 
10. Dower.Where no details about the mode of payment of dower are specified in the 
nikahnama or the marriage contract, the entire amount of the dower shall be presumed to be 
payable on demand. 
11. Power to make rules. 
(1) The Government may make rules to carry into effect the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(2) In making rules under this section, such Government, may provide that a breach of any of 
the rules shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one month, or with 
fine which may extent to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
(3) Rules made under this section shall be published in the official Gazette and shall thereupon 
have effect as if enacted in this Ordinance. 
12. Amendment of child marriage restraint act, 1929 (xix of 1929). Omitted by Ord. 27 of 1981. 
13. Amendment of the dissolution of muslim marriages act, 1939 (viii of 1939). Omitted by Ord. 
27 of 1981. 
 
